README.md, before:

# 📚 Library Management System

The Minimal Library Management System (Frontend) is a clean, responsive, and feature-rich client-side application built with React, TypeScript, Redux Toolkit Query (RTK Query), and Tailwind CSS. It allows users to manage books, perform CRUD operations, borrow books, and view a borrow summary without requiring authentication. The frontend interacts seamlessly with a RESTful API, leveraging RTK Query for efficient state management and API integration.This project emphasizes a minimalist UI, intuitive user experience, and robust type safety, making it suitable for small-scale library management needs. 

## 🌐 Live Links: 
- **Frontend**: https://libraboxlms.vercel.app/
- **Backend**: https://libraboxlmsserver.vercel.app/

## 🚀 Features

- 🔐 **Public Routes**: All pages are accessible without authentication.
- 🔄 **Book Management**:
  - **Book List**: Displays books in a responsive table with columns for Title, Author, Genre, ISBN, Copies, Availability, Image and Actions (Edit, Delete, Borrow).
  - **Add Book**: Form to create a new book with fields for Title, Author, Genre, ISBN, Description, Copies, Image and Availability.
  - **Edit Book**: Pre-filled form to update book details, reflecting changes instantly in the UI.
  - **Delete Book**: Confirmation dialog before removing a book.
  - **Borrow Book**: Form to borrow a book with Quantity and Due Date fields, ensuring quantity does not exceed available copies.
- 📊 **Borrow Summary**: Aggregated view of borrowed books with Book Title, ISBN, and Total Quantity Borrowed.
- ✅ **Responsive UI**: Fully responsive layout for mobile, tablet, and desktop devices using Tailwind CSS.
- ⚙️ **Navigation**: Simple navbar with links to All Books, Add Book, and Borrow Summary.
- ©️ **Footer**: Basic footer with site credits.
- 🔐 **Schema Validation** with Mongoose & TypeScript
- 🔄 **Business Logic Enforcement**:
  - Auto-update availability on borrow
  - Prevent borrowing more than available
- 🧠 **Instance Method** to deduct book copies and update availability
- ⚙️ **Middleware Hook** to handle availability during book creation/update
- 📊 **Aggregation Pipeline** to summarize borrowed books
- 🔍 **Advanced Querying**: filter, sort, and limit books
- ✅ **Robust Error Handling** with clear success & failure responses
- 📦 **RESTful API** architecture with versioning support

## 🧱 Tech Stack

- **Frontend**: React + Vite + React Router (Data mode)
- **Language**: TypeScript
- **State Management**: Redux Toolkit + RTK Query
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS
- **Form Validation**: Zod
- **Backend**: Express.js
- **Language**: TypeScript
- **Database**: MongoDB with Mongoose ODM
- **Validation**: Mongoose schema validation
- **Tooling**: ts-node-dev, dotenv, nodemon, ESLint


## 📁 Project Structure Frontend

```plaintext
├── public/                   # Static assets
├── src/
│   ├── redux/                # RTK Query API slices for book and borrow endpoints
│   │   ├── store/            # Redux store configuration and slices
│   ├── components/           # Reusable UI components (e.g., Navbar, Footer, BookTable)
│   ├── pages/                # Page components (Home, All Books, BorrowSummary)
│   ├── store/                # Redux store configuration and slices
│   ├── types/                # TypeScript interfaces and types
│   ├── App.tsx               # Main app component
│   ├── index.tsx             # Entry point
│   ├── main.css              # Tailwind CSS styles
├── .gitignore                # Git ignore file
├── package.json              # Project dependencies and scripts
├── tsconfig.json             # TypeScript configuration
├── README.md                 # This file

```

## 📁 Project Structure Backend

```plaintext
src/
├── app.ts                  # Express setup and configuration
    ├── routes/             # 
    ├── models/             # Mongoose models and interfaces
    ├── controllers/        # Business logic & API routes for books and borrowing
    ├── interfaces/         # TypeScript interfaces
├── server.ts               # Application entry point
├── app.ts                  # Application entry point

```


## ✅ Business Logic
- Book Availability: Books with 0 copies are marked unavailable.
- Borrowing: Borrow quantity cannot exceed available copies; books become unavailable when copies reach 0.
- Optimistic Updates: UI reflects changes instantly, with rollback on API failure.
- Error Handling: User-friendly error messages via toast notifications.


## ⚙️ Getting Started Frontend

Follow these steps to set up and run the project locally.

### 1️⃣ Prerequisites

- **Node.js**: Version >= 18
- A running backend API (e.g., Node.js + Express + MongoDB) with endpoints for books and borrows.

### 2️⃣ Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Rza-O/Library-Management-System-Fullstack
   cd /library-management-system/Frontend
2. Install dependencies
    ```bash
    npm install
3. Start the development server
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```

## ⚙️ Getting Started Backend

Follow these steps to set up and run the project locally.

### 1️⃣ Prerequisites

- **Node.js**: Version >= 18
- **MongoDB**: Either MongoDB Atlas or a local MongoDB instance

### 2️⃣ Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Rza-O/Library-Management-System-Fullstack
   cd cd /library-management-system/backendrontend
2. Create a .env file in the project root based on .env.example

    ```bash
   MONGODB_URL=mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@cluster.mongodb.net/dbname
   ```
3. Install dependencies
    ```bash
    npm install
4. Start the development server
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```


## 🙏🏽 Acknowledgments
- Inspired by minimalist library management systems like BookLovers and PrintPress.
- Built with  using React, Redux Toolkit Query, TypeScript, and Tailwind CSS.

Commit message:

feat: update README to clarify project scope and enhance description of full-stack architecture

README.md, after:

# 📕 Library Management System

The Minimal Library Management System is a full-stack application designed for small-scale library management. The frontend is a clean, responsive, and feature-rich client-side application built with React, TypeScript, Redux Toolkit Query (RTK Query), and Tailwind CSS. The backend is a robust RESTful API built with Node.js, Express, TypeScript, and MongoDB (Mongoose). Together, they enable users to manage books, perform CRUD operations, borrow books, and view a borrow summary without requiring authentication.The system emphasizes a minimalist UI, intuitive user experience, robust type safety, and efficient state management. It supports core functionalities like book management, borrowing with availability tracking, data aggregation, and flexible querying, making it ideal for small libraries or educational purposes.

## 🌐 Live Links: 
- **Frontend**: https://libraboxlms.vercel.app/
- **Backend**: https://libraboxlmsserver.vercel.app/

## 🚀 Features

- 🔐 **Public Routes**: All pages are accessible without authentication.
- 🔄 **Book Management**:
  - **Book List**: Displays books in a responsive table with columns for Title, Author, Genre, ISBN, Copies, Availability, Image and Actions (Edit, Delete, Borrow).
  - **Add Book**: Form to create a new book with fields for Title, Author, Genre, ISBN, Description, Copies, Image and Availability.
  - **Edit Book**: Pre-filled form to update book details, reflecting changes instantly in the UI.
  - **Delete Book**: Confirmation dialog before removing a book.
  - **Borrow Book**: Form to borrow a book with Quantity and Due Date fields, ensuring quantity does not exceed available copies.
- 📊 **Borrow Summary**: Aggregated view of borrowed books with Book Title, ISBN, and Total Quantity Borrowed.
- ✅ **Responsive UI**: Fully responsive layout for mobile, tablet, and desktop devices using Tailwind CSS.
- ⚙️ **Navigation**: Simple navbar with links to All Books, Add Book, and Borrow Summary.
- ©️ **Footer**: Basic footer with site credits.
- 🔐 **Schema Validation** with Mongoose & TypeScript
- 🔄 **Business Logic Enforcement**:
  - Auto-update availability on borrow
  - Prevent borrowing more than available
- 🧠 **Instance Method** to deduct book copies and update availability
- ⚙️ **Middleware Hook** to handle availability during book creation/update
- 📊 **Aggregation Pipeline** to summarize borrowed books
- 🔍 **Advanced Querying**: filter, sort, and limit books
- ✅ **Robust Error Handling** with clear success & failure responses
- 📦 **RESTful API** architecture with versioning support

## 🧱 Tech Stack

- **Frontend**: React + Vite + React Router (Data mode)
- **Language**: TypeScript
- **State Management**: Redux Toolkit + RTK Query
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS
- **Form Validation**: Zod
- **Backend**: Express.js
- **Language**: TypeScript
- **Database**: MongoDB with Mongoose ODM
- **Validation**: Mongoose schema validation
- **Tooling**: ts-node-dev, dotenv, nodemon, ESLint


## 📁 Project Structure Frontend

```plaintext
├── public/                   # Static assets
├── src/
│   ├── redux/                # RTK Query API slices for book and borrow endpoints
│   │   ├── store/            # Redux store configuration and slices
│   ├── components/           # Reusable UI components (e.g., Navbar, Footer, BookTable)
│   ├── pages/                # Page components (Home, All Books, BorrowSummary)
│   ├── store/                # Redux store configuration and slices
│   ├── types/                # TypeScript interfaces and types
│   ├── App.tsx               # Main app component
│   ├── index.tsx             # Entry point
│   ├── main.css              # Tailwind CSS styles
├── .gitignore                # Git ignore file
├── package.json              # Project dependencies and scripts
├── tsconfig.json             # TypeScript configuration
├── README.md                 # This file

```

## 📁 Project Structure Backend

```plaintext
src/
├── app.ts                  # Express setup and configuration
    ├── routes/             # 
    ├── models/             # Mongoose models and interfaces
    ├── controllers/        # Business logic & API routes for books and borrowing
    ├── interfaces/         # TypeScript interfaces
├── server.ts               # Application entry point
├── app.ts                  # Application entry point

```


## ✅ Business Logic
- Book Availability: Books with 0 copies are marked unavailable.
- Borrowing: Borrow quantity cannot exceed available copies; books become unavailable when copies reach 0.
- Optimistic Updates: UI reflects changes instantly, with rollback on API failure.
- Error Handling: User-friendly error messages via toast notifications.


## ⚙️ Getting Started Frontend

Follow these steps to set up and run the project locally.

### 1️⃣ Prerequisites

- **Node.js**: Version >= 18
- A running backend API (e.g., Node.js + Express + MongoDB) with endpoints for books and borrows.

### 2️⃣ Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Rza-O/Library-Management-System-Fullstack
   cd /library-management-system/Frontend
2. Install dependencies
    ```bash
    npm install
3. Start the development server
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```

## ⚙️ Getting Started Backend

Follow these steps to set up and run the project locally.

### 1️⃣ Prerequisites

- **Node.js**: Version >= 18
- **MongoDB**: Either MongoDB Atlas or a local MongoDB instance

### 2️⃣ Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Rza-O/Library-Management-System-Fullstack
   cd cd /library-management-system/backendrontend
2. Create a .env file in the project root based on .env.example

    ```bash
   MONGODB_URL=mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@cluster.mongodb.net/dbname
   ```
3. Install dependencies
    ```bash
    npm install
4. Start the development server
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```


## 🙏🏽 Acknowledgments
- Inspired by minimalist library management systems like BookLovers and PrintPress.
- Built with  using React, Redux Toolkit Query, TypeScript, and Tailwind CSS.
